Refactor ztunnel docs (#15028)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ambient/usage/add-workloads/index.md

---
title: Add workloads to the mesh
description: Understand how to add workloads to an ambient mesh.
weight: 1
owner: istio/wg-networking-maintainers
test: no
---

> In most cases, a cluster administrator will deploy the Istio mesh infrastructure. Once Istio is successfully deployed in ambient mode, it will be transparently available to applications deployed by all users in namespaces that have been configured to use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most cases, a cluster administrator will deploy the Istio mesh infrastructure. Once Istio is successfully deployed with ambient mode enabled, the ambient {{< gloss >}}data plane{{< /gloss >}} will be transparently available to applications and namespaces in the cluster that have been configured to use it.
```

Reviewer: I am mostly pushing the `data plane` verbiage because it makes statements like this clearer IMO - you install ambient _with support for_ the ambient data plane mode, and then you _may choose_ to use the ambient data plane mode, the sidecar data plane mode, or both, as a runtime concern.

"ambient mode" is a bit too fuzzy, we should probably be clear with each usage whether we are talking about "the install flag" or "the runtime mode" since they aren't the same thing.

(that being said, I am fine with eliding the difference where it makes grammatical sense)

Author: Good centi-thread on Slack: to summarise, I'm going to try a pass with

* "support for ambient mode" instead of "ambient mode enabled" (with a big change throughout docs/blogs) to be clearer
* "ambient data plane mode" on first use, or where required for disambiguation, "ambient mode" thereafter

## Enabling ambient for an application

> To add an application to the ambient mesh, add the label `istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient`. You can apply this label to a namespace or to an individual pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add an applications or namespaces to the ambient mesh, add the label `istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient` to the corresponding resource. You can apply this label to a namespace or to an individual pod.
```

> Ambient mode can be seamlessly enabled (or disabled) completely transparently as far as the application pods are concerned. Unlike when operating in {{< gloss >}}sidecar{{< /gloss >}} mode, there is no need to restart applications to add them to the mesh, and they will not show as having an extra container deployed in their pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ambient {{< gloss >}}data plane{{< /gloss >}} can can be seamlessly enabled (or disabled) completely transparently as far as the application pods are concerned. Unlike when operating in {{< gloss >}}sidecar{{< /gloss >}} data plane mode, there is no need to restart applications to add them to the mesh, and they will not show as having an extra container deployed in their pod.
```

> ## Communicating between pods in different modes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Communicating between pods in different data plane modes
```

> There are multiple options for interoperability between ambient pods and non-ambient endpoints (including Kubernetes application pods, Istio gateways or Kubernetes Gateway API instances). This interoperability provides multiple options for seamlessly integrating ambient and non-ambient workloads within the same Istio mesh, allowing for phased introduction of ambient capability as best suits the needs of your mesh deployment and operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple options for interoperability between application pods using the ambient data plane mode, and non-ambient endpoints (including Kubernetes application pods, Istio gateways or Kubernetes Gateway API instances). This interoperability provides multiple options for seamlessly integrating ambient and non-ambient workloads within the same Istio mesh, allowing for phased introduction of ambient capability as best suits the needs of your mesh deployment and operation.
```

### Pods outside the mesh

You may have namespaces which are not part of the mesh at all, in either sidecar or ambient mode. In this case, the non-mesh pods initiate traffic directly to the destination pods without going through the source node's ztunnel, while the destination pod's ztunnel enforces any L4 policy to control whether traffic should be allowed or denied.

For example, setting a `PeerAuthentication` policy with mTLS mode set to `STRICT`, in the ambient namespace will cause traffic from outside the mesh to be denied.

> ### Pods inside the mesh in sidecar mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Pods inside the mesh using sidecar data plane
```

> Istio supports East-West interoperability between a pod using a sidecar proxy and an ambient pod within the same mesh. The sidecar proxy knows to use the HBONE protocol since the destination has been discovered to be an HBONE destination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Istio supports East-West interoperability between a pod using sidecar data plane and a pod using the ambient data plane within the same mesh. The sidecar data plane knows to use the HBONE protocol since the destination has been discovered to be an HBONE destination.
```

{{< tip >}}
For sidecar proxies to use the HBONE/mTLS signaling option when communicating with ambient destinations, they need to be configured with `ISTIO_META_ENABLE_HBONE` set to `true` in the proxy metadata. This is the default in `MeshConfig` when using the `ambient` profile, hence you do not have to do anything else when using this profile.
{{< /tip >}}

A `PeerAuthentication` policy with mTLS mode set to `STRICT` will allow traffic from a pod with an Istio sidecar proxy.

### Ingress and egress gateways and ambient pods

An ingress gateway may run in a non-ambient namespace, and expose services provided by ambient, sidecar and non-mesh pods. Interoperability is also supported between pods in an ambient mesh and Istio egress gateways.

> ## Pod selection logic for ambient and sidecar modes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pod selection logic for ambient and sidecar data plane modes
```

> Istio with sidecar proxies can co-exist with ambient based node level proxies within the same cluster. It is important to ensure that the same pod or namespace does not get configured to use both a sidecar proxy and ambient mode. However, if this does occur, currently sidecar injection takes precedence for such a pod or namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Istio's sidecar data plane mode can co-exist with ambient data plane mode in the same cluster. It is important to ensure that the same pod or namespace does not get configured to use both a sidecar data plane mode and ambient data plane mode. However, if this does occur, currently the sidecar data plane mode takes precedence for such a pod or namespace.
```

Note that two pods within the same namespace could in theory be set to use different modes by labeling individual pods separately from the namespace label, however this is not recommended. For most common use cases a single mode should be used for all pods within a single namespace.

> The exact logic to determine whether a pod is set up to use ambient mode is as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The exact logic to determine whether a pod is set up to use ambient data plane mode is as follows.
```
